---
layout: post
title:  "Iterator"
date:   2019-06-4 20:08:00 +0800
categories: api
author: Justin Jia
---

*Iterator* is a basic and important design pattern, which gives you a way to access elements of an aggregate object without knowing its internal structure. Thanks to this abstraction, many general algorithms could be applied to different categories of collections, though their perfermance may differ.

## Position of the implicit cursor

Starting as a C++ programmer, when I first used the iterator in Java, I was not adapted to it. An iterator in C++ stands for "where I am now", but that in Java is more about "Where I can go". When it comes to `ListIterator`, this difference is more obvious, and it is also described in detail in Java doc.

> An iterator for a list of length `n` has `n+1` possible cursor positions, as illustrated by the carets (`^`) below:
> 
><PRE>
                     Element(0)   Element(1)   Element(2)   ... Element(n-1)
cursor positions:  ^            ^            ^            ^                  ^
></PRE>

Consequently, for a length `n` list, it is valid to insert at the index `n` via `ListIterator#add(E)`. In the same way, for `List#listIterator(int)`, it's legal to pass `n` as the argument.

## Where `ListIterator#add(E)` puts an element?

**For an empty list:**

1. before add(E)
   <PRE>
   cursor position:  ^
   </PRE>
2. after add(E)
   <PRE>
                        newElem
   cursor position:             ^
   </PRE>

**For an non-empty list:**

1. before add(E)

   <PRE>
                     Element(0)   Element(1)
   cursor position:             ^
   </PRE>

2. after add(E)
   <PRE>
                     Element(0)   newElement   Element(1)
   cursor position:                          ^
   </PRE>

## `remove()` and `set(E)` operate on the last returned element

`Iterator` and `ListIterator` define `remove()` and `set(E)` in terms of the last returned element, if they're not used correctlly, they would throw `IllegalStateException`.

> Note that the `#remove` and `#set(Object)` methods are <i>not</i> defined in terms of the cursor position;  they are defined to operate on the last element returned by a call to `#next` or `#previous()`.

| Method                  | Illegal Senario                                              |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `Iterator#remove()`     | if the `next` method has not yet been called, or the `remove` method has already been called after the last call to the `next`  method |
| `ListIterator#remove()` | if neither `next` nor `previous` have been called, or `remove` or `add` have been called after the last call to `next` or `previous` |
| `ListIterator#set(E)`   | if neither `next` nor `previous` have been called, or `remove` or `add` have been called after the last call to `next` or `previous` |

To summarize, `remove()` and `set(E)` are mutually exclusively with each other, and they could be applied only once for one last returned item produced by calling `next()` or `previous()`. Those limitation is not techenical but more operational. If someone can use `next()` , `previous()`, `remove()` , `set(E)` and `add(E)` arbitrarily, the current position is hard to remember and it's more error-prone.


References:

1. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56347/iterators-in-c-stl-vs-java-is-there-a-conceptual-difference
